# BIOMD0000000143: Olsen2003_neutrophil_oscillatory_metabolism

## Installation

Download this repository, and install with distutils

`python setup.py install`

Or, install using pip

`pip install git+https://github.com/biomodels/BIOMD0000000143.git`

To install a specific version (in this example, from the 2014-09-16 BioModels release)

`pip install git+https://github.com/biomodels/BIOMD0000000143.git@20140916`


# Model Notes


Olsen2003_neutrophil_oscillatory_metabolism

This model is described in the article:

[A model of the oscillatory metabolism of activated
neutrophils.](http://identifiers.org/pubmed/12524266)

Olsen LF, Kummer U, Kindzelskii AL, Petty HR.

Biophys. J. 2003 Jan; 84(1): 69-81

Abstract:

We present a two-compartment model to explain the oscillatory behavior
observed experimentally in activated neutrophils. Our model is based mainly on
the peroxidase-oxidase reaction catalyzed by myeloperoxidase with melatonin as
a cofactor and NADPH oxidase, a major protein in the phagosome membrane of the
leukocyte. The model predicts that after activation of a neutrophil, an
increase in the activity of the hexose monophosphate shunt and the delivery of
myeloperoxidase into the phagosome results in oscillations in oxygen and
NAD(P)H concentration. The period of oscillation changes from >200 s to 10-30
s. The model is consistent with previously reported oscillations in cell
metabolism and oxidant production. Key features and predictions of the model
were confirmed experimentally. The requirement of the hexose monophosphate
pathway for 10 s oscillations was verified using 6-aminonicotinamide and
dexamethasone, which are inhibitors of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase. The
role of the NADPH oxidase in promoting oscillations was confirmed by dose-
response studies of the effect of diphenylene iodonium, an inhibitor of the
NADPH oxidase. Moreover, the model predicted an increase in the amplitude of
NADPH oscillations in the presence of melatonin, which was confirmed
experimentally. Successful computer modeling of complex chemical dynamics
within cells and their chemical perturbation will enhance our ability to
identify new antiinflammatory compounds.

This model is hosted on [BioModels Database](http://www.ebi.ac.uk/biomodels/)
and identified by:
[BIOMD0000000143](http://identifiers.org/biomodels.db/BIOMD0000000143).

To cite BioModels Database, please use: [BioModels Database: An enhanced,
curated and annotated resource for published quantitative kinetic
models](http://identifiers.org/pubmed/20587024).

To the extent possible under law, all copyright and related or neighbouring
rights to this encoded model have been dedicated to the public domain
worldwide. Please refer to [CC0 Public Domain
Dedication](http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) for more
information.


